What is the repercussion of the environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic situation?
On 31st December 2019, a novel coronavirus was identified in Wuhan, China. It spread like wildfire in the world. On 11th March 2020, WHO declared COVID 19 as a pandemic and issued guidelines like Sanitizing hands regularly, wearing masks, and social distancing as viable methods for prevention against this virus. Social distancing means staying away from other people. So, to limit human interaction various governments all over the world chose life before the economy and ordered complete lockdown in their countries. All schools, colleges, offices, factories, public places, etc. were shutdown from immediate effect. As of 7th June 2020, COVID 19 confirmed cases worldwide are 69,94,605 with 4,02,453 deaths and 34,20,048 recovered. The USA didn’t impose lockdown in the early stages due to which it has nearly 19,88,545 confirmed cases with a death rate of 5.6% (as of 7th June 2020) whereas in India lockdown was imposed at the first stage, and so we have 2,47,000 confirmed cases with a death rate of 2.8%. Rights reserved to Statista As we know it is us, Humans, who keep exploiting nature which has nurtured us and turn a blind eye to the havoc of our misdeeds. Current environmental concerns like depletion of the ozone layer, climate change, soil erosion, air pollution, water pollution, soil pollution, acid rain, noise pollution, loss of biodiversity, and many more are a result of our selfish and never-ending desires for development at the cost of the environment. Humans are getting what they deserved, animals are safe and the environment is healing due to a reduction in pollution levels. All this is just the tip of the iceberg . The reality is that humans, despite being under threat due to COVID 19, cyclones, earthquakes, and locusts attacks are still damaging the environment. Apart from the above-mentioned media channels, various other news articles have reported such incidents from various locations around the world. Now, what do you think : Follow social distancing guidelines . Stay Safe . 