Impact of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) on the Indian Economy
From the economic point of
view, India is confronted today with perhaps its greatest emergency since independence. The global financial
crisis in 2008-09 was a gigantic demand shock, but our workers could still get-up-and-go to work, our firms were coming off years of steady growth, our financial system was largely sound, and our government finances were blooming. None of this is true today as
we fight the
coronavirus pandemic. Yet
there is also no reason to
despair. With the right undertakings and
priorities, and drawing on India’s many sources of strength, it can kill this virus back, and even set the stage for a much more hopeful tomorrow. In scenario 2, inflation picks up in H2 FY
2021 as demand revives faster than supply. Inflation may increase above the
target range (4 percent) for a short time in FY 2021 because of economic
overheating. In this scenario, inflation remains 3-4 percent during this period
despite weak demand because of a sharper fall in production. India has already undertaken the following
measures to counter the impact from of the pandemic: The crisis is a story with an uncertain ending. However, what is clear that the COVID-19 has introduced new challenges to the business environment which called for a measured, practical and informed approach from political and business leaders. A company needs to think and act across five horizons: The government should consider certain measures in order to manage the pandemic. The following steps and the recognition of the likely scenarios for the Indian economy can enable policymakers to identify appropriate countermeasures to stem the spread of the pandemic:  It would also have to be seen how long this virus continues to affect India and going by the hygiene standard and herd mentality that we have, the virus continues to affect us beyond 3 months and extends to 6-8 months, quite obviously these packages would be grossly insufficient and more money will have to be pumped into the economy. If the need arises, currency notes will have to be printed and circulated and concerns about higher fiscal deficit should be simply pushed to the backseat. The corporate sector and a section of large-hearted people have also come forward at this time of distress to support the government initiatives in fighting this menace which should provide some financial comfort to the Government. 