How you lead a project or a team without any technical expertise?
Have you ever wondered what’s common between Sir Alex Ferguson, Pep Guardiola, and Jose Mourinho? I know it might look a lame question, especially to the ardent football followers. At first instinct, the answer is that they are regarded as the top managers in the football universe. #UCLwinners. But when given a closer look, these managers, weren’t that great when it came to their careers as football players. Any naïve observer can build a fallacy of causation and correlation that those who don’t have a great career as a football player will go on to become a great football manager. But is this restricted just to football? Mike Brearley, one of the greatest captains in the history of cricket and the author of the book the art of captaincy, wasn’t the prolific batsman of his time. Our former President, A P J Abdul Kalam didn’t have a political background, but was still appointed as the president of our country and went to become one of the finest presidents our country has ever had. So, can it be stated with confidence that great leaders need not be the expert in their respective fields?Let’s understand the leadership role, types of leaders, and explore a few more perspectives before we arrive at a conclusion.  Though it can be argued that technical experts are also the great leaders in their areas, but these leaders are generally at the middle management level. As per the different leadership styles, a servant leader is the one who always tries to achieve the goal of the team. These leaders are the ones who have a management objective laid out in front of them and they drive the team closer to achieving the target by having the people-first mindset, a collaborative approach towards solving the problem. These are the people or the leaders needed at the execution level of the project or those who are too close to the employees at the bottom-most level. Since the managers at the top of the pyramid don’t get much time to invest in people they appoint the right people on their behalf to get the job done.   Consider an IT firm. So as per the points mentioned above, does it mean that a leader or the manager shouldn’t know how to code? Depends. If the person is the first line manager then he or she should probably know how to code so that he or she can help the team in achieving the target of producing less garbage which might be one of the project’s KPIs. The project manager, who might be an operations manager, (#MBA) from an IT background, probably need not know what line of code is to be written but should know the algorithms or the logic behind the code so that he or she can validate the code from the client’s perspective. The CEO, might not be from an IT background but should know how to run an IT firm rather than the syntax of the code. But in today’s competitive world leaders can’t be one dimensional. They need to have expertise in multiple areas to be at the top. Mike Brearley if got a chance to play a T20 match, won’t even get picked into aside, not because of his age, but because of his not so great looking batting statistics(#Thegamehaschanged). His leadership skills won’t be enough to get him into the squad. But he can be a great leader if selected to coach the top 15 captains in the world today. As we have already discussed the film directors, their job isn’t to teach the cameramen on how to set up or operate (lens settings, etc) the camera. Their job is to guide the cameramen on what angle it should be held and how he or she should coordinate with the lights crew so that a perfect shot is captured. So even if a leader may not be a technical expert of his field, but if he or she has the right approach and mindset, understands the system and its process, then he or she can hire the best talent for the job and can get the work done by guiding the talent, with his or her vision. 